<h1 align="center">ExoFILT</h1>
<h3 align="center">Transfer learning for robust and accelerated analysis of exocytosis single-particle tracking data</h3>

**ExoFILT** is a Deep Learning binary classifier designed to identify bona fide exocytic events from live-cell imaging data in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*.
For more information on this pipeline, see [ExoFILT: Transfer learning for robust and accelerated analysis of exocytosis single-particle tracking data](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.02.27.708581v1)
---

## Overview

This repository contains two main components:

1. **ImageJ/Fiji scripts**  
   Preprocessing and annotation GUIs to generate and curate tracks.
   
2. **Neural network inference**  
   A Jupyter notebook to classify tracks using ExoFILT.

The pipeline allows going from raw microscopy movies to unfiltered tracks, then filter them with ExoFILT, and finally curating them manually with an ImageJ GUI.

The repository includes the pretrained ExoFILT models used for inference, provided in the `models/` directory.

## Installation

### 1. Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/GallegoLab/ExoFILT.git
cd ExoFILT
```

### 2. Create and activate the Conda environment
```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate exofilt
```
This environment contains the required Python dependencies for neural network inference.

## ImageJ / Fiji Preprocessing & Annotation

### Requirements
The ImageJ scripts were developed and tested with:
  * ImageJ 1.54p
  * Java 1.8.0_322
  * TrackMate v7.14.0
  * Jython scripting enabled
  * Accurate Gaussian Blur plugin. 
  
A standard **Fiji** installation should contain the required dependencies.
  
### Scripts

1) `1_Preprocessing.py`: Preprocessing of simultaneous dual-color live-cell imaging movies.
2) `2_Tracking.py`: Automated tracking of preprocessed movies using TrackMate.
3) `3_Annotation_GUI.py`: GUI for manual annotation of individual tracks in channel 1.
4) `4_Colocalization_GUI.py`: GUI for manual annotation of colocalization between channels.

### How to use

All raw movies used in the ExoFILT work have been deposited in a [Zenodo repository](https://zenodo.org/records/18962705). These can be used as test data for the workflow presented here. CSV files with annotations can also be found in this repository: these files could be opened with the `3_Annotation_GUI.py` script to see examples of bona fide and ambiguous exocytic events.

#### 1) Preprocessing
Place raw movies in a folder named:
```
1_Raw
```
Open `1_Preprocessing.py` in ImageJ and run it with Jython (*Language &rarr; Jython*). 

After selecting the appropiate parameters in the initial dialog, the script will create two new folders:
```
2_Splitted
3_Preprocessed
```
These folders contain channel-separated movies, before and after preprocessing, respectively.

#### 2) Automated Tracking
To perform automated tracking, the plugin **`Accurate Gaussian Blur`** is required. To install this plugin, download [Accurate_Gaussian_Blur.class](https://imagej.net/ij/plugins/download/Accurate_Gaussian_Blur.class), copy to the plugins folder and restart ImageJ. 

Open `2_Tracking.py` in ImageJ and run it with Jython. 
 
The script runs **TrackMate** on the C1 movies located in:
```
3_Preprocessed
```
It generates a list of tracks stored as:
```
tracks_all.csv
```
All tracking outputs are stored in a new folder:
```
4_Tracking
```

#### 3) ExoFILT Filtering 

The file `tracks_all.csv` can be filtered using **ExoFILT** (see the *Neural Network Inference* section below).

#### 4) Manual Annotation 

After filtering with ExoFILT, manual annotation can be performed.

Open:
```
3_Annotation_GUI.py
```
The GUI sequentially displays each track (movie crop and intensity profile), allowing the user to assign a label.

#### 5) Colocalization Analysis
If desired, colocalization of bona fide C1 events with channel 2 can be assessed using: 
```
4_Colocalization_GUI.py
```

## Neural Network Inference

### 1. Launch Jupyter

```bash
jupyter lab
```
or
```bash
jupyter notebook
```

### 2. Run the inference notebook

The notebook:

```
notebooks/inference.ipynb
```
The notebook requires:
  * Preprocessed movies (`3_Preprocessed`)
  * A CSV file containing tracks to filter (e.g. `tracks_all.csv` generated by `2_Tracking.py`).

### Inference Workflow

Briefly, the notebook performs the following steps:

1) Apply a permissive parametric filter to the tracks
2) Crop the filtered tracks from the movies
3) Load the cropped tracks
4) Perform data augmentation
5) Run inference using five runs of ExoFILT
6) Compute a final ExoFILT score

Users can then select different thresholds on the ExoFILT score to obtain subsets of tracks for downstream manual annotation.

### Notes
  * The pipeline assumes the directory structure generated by the preprocessing scripts.
  * Paths inside the notebook should be adjusted if data are stored in different locations.




